# Career Excavation  
  
Q: We can do that career excavation interview you described. I’ll ask chronologically, you just tell the stories. I- y- you provide the raw truth, I’ll help translate it. Then we map those capabilities to real markets. Who hires it? Who contracts for it? Who buys it as a product? And then the resume becomes one output, not the starting point. If that feels okay, I’d start at the very beginning. When you were choosing what to study in college, what were you drawn to and why?  
  
A: Uh- Great question So when I was choosing to go to college, I didn't even choose what to study And I'll tell you why. So I grew up in Rwanda and I went to high school- the high school system was a bit different, but you know, what we call middle school, what we call high school here. Basically primary school and secondary school. Primary school is six years, and secondary school is six years and early on, I'd- uh, you know, I went to uh to uh a- You know, I studied at a minor seminary, so at a Catholic school, but I basically stud- you know, concentrated in Latin, biology, chemistry, math, physics, you know, STEM, right  
  
And so I did that for the first three- you know, for the- you- you know, for the six years of high school. And then when I was 18- No, no, 15, that's when I found out, you know, there were scholarships to go to America to go study presidential scholarships for smart kids. And I started preparing for that So I just knew I had to get really good grades at a national exam that every Rwandan took when, you know, when they crossed that finish line of high school at 18 So I just basically kept going, getting good grades and I just had to get good at English. But again, remember, my concentration was specifically in Latin and biology and chemistry. So my, you know, everybody that graduated from where I graduated in the concentration that I was doing, you know, we had been told that, you know, what you do is go to medical school Because, you know, a lot of biology and medical school, doctors, I mean I was one of the smartest kids in the whole country. So, I mean, doctor, surgeons, to me, you know, that's the box that I thought I fed in, I fit in, you know So. You know, my- I used, you know, my- my nickname was Louis Pasteur by my teacher, biology teacher, because I was so good at biology. So I thought I was going to be a surgeon. And- and so when it came time to, hey, you got a scholarship, you got to go to America. I'm- Oh my gosh, I'm getting America. I could even be a doctor in America So I started like, but again, I did not know anything about majors, about colleges. I didn't- I didn't shop colleges around. You just got you know, a scholarship to a specific school you study whatever that school has and you got four years paid tuition. So, go study and then anything else you need after that, that's on you. Again, I did not know anything about, you know, 10 years. No, no, no, I just knew I had four years and then when I- you know, I went to- I- you know, I found out I- I was going to Cal Baptist. They got us a F1 visa stuff and it was like, what do you want to study? And I- I you know, I basically asked what was- what was there? They sold the grades that I had got and they basically put me in electrical and computer engineering. That's about it. I did not choose, I did not do nothing But here's where it gets interesting So about you know, when I was back in Rwanda Again, I- you know, this is, you know, I grew up in Rwanda. Timeframe 1990 to 19- uh to 2000. 200 9. So that's- that's my whole entire life there. So I didn't grow up with no cell phone. I mean, you- you can understand the context I was there, no cell phone, no computer. By the time I was about 18, my parents bought like this desktop uh I don't- I think it was a Windows or whatever. You know, I had no internet. It was just to kind of, you know, type things- we were, you know, play some games on it. And in my high school, they had a similar desktop. Again, just to learn how to type on a computer. And I remember that's when I, you know, I started getting really- get excited to kind of learn how to type, you know, blind type. You know what I'm saying? So, you know, bought some like soft- software that helped me, you know, learn how to put, you know, hands on the keyboard. Out of nowhere, I learned that, but I- you know, intuitively I wanted to type without looking at the keyboard. I thought it was cool. And then, so that's- that's the- the extent of the- the- the experience with technology that I had. I had a flip phone, it was a Motorola flip phone. I just had it for music, you know, because, you know - MP3s, right So. Then fast- and then and the other experience that I had with, you know, with web or software or whatever was one time, I think I was about 12 and my father, you know, kind of, you know, we- we knew that when we were growing up, we had family in Germany, you know, my dad had sisters in Europe and whatnot, so we had- we had cousins that we never met And You know, when we were 12, you know, my dad came up with the idea to kind of like, you know, have us write them by email. So I did not know what the heck that was, but he took us to a cyber cafe and You know, there- you know, there was a row of computers and a bunch people were sitting there and we went, three of us, me, my dad and my sister, we sat in front of a computer and he just kind of, you know- I don't know, he used this email, we started typing- and typing. We just sent it using his email. You know, everybody typed wh- they wanted to say to our cousin, he typed what he wanted to say to his sister and then we sent. But to me, I knew how to send letters, you know, I knew how to write letters, you know, physically on a piece of paper, but this- this experience was weird and different, but I was like, hey, my dad is saying do this, we do it. And then a week later, we went back to the same- at different computer, matter of fact, because we started at a different- shi- in a different computer, and then lo and behold, man, our cousin wrote with pictures. I was like, what the f  
  
What happened So to me, I remember that- that memory was so vivid, right? So anyway, fast forward, I'm in America, just landed America out on a Jack in America. I'm still getting culture shock, whatever. And I'm realizing, hey, you know, you got a scholarship to go to America, you got the hell out of Rwanda Well. You got to go study- again, I could speak English, but my whole entire life, man, I've I- I've been used to just going and doing what they told you Not what you wanted because that's what life is. You just go where they tell you, right. And then, you know, so no different here. I speak English, you know, I've studied my whole entire life and people pay me to go study in America? I'll figure it out whatever it is So once I got to America, we had this whole, you know, dean, you know, welcome and why did you choose to study this? I'm like, same thing I just told you, man. What do you mean chose? You know? Eh- But then I was like but they were like, well, you're going to be doing electrical computer engineering, like you can switch, like, in America you got options. I'm like, what do you mean I can switch? Before I switch, Uh I know I might be in trouble with my country because they pay to do this So before I switch, let me just first know what y'all do. You know what I'm saying? Like what is electrical and computer engineering And they were like, you know- and they were like, what do you think it is? You know, that's when I started freaking learning about questioning. It's like, what do you think it is? I'm like, I just asked you a question. But anyway, they were like, what do you think it is? I'm like, okay, electrical, understand electricity, you know, understand little English. Understand computers, I've talked- you know, I've used computers, but wait a minute. Confused. Are you guys like the guys that do email And they were like- They were like, uh, email is one of the software, but you know, it's bigger But yeah, email, you know, websites, but you know, software is a big, big beast, man. You got to learn how all the you know, electricity turns into circuits. I- I'm- I'm like but email is also part of that? They were like, yeah. I'm like, dude, I want to learn how that shit works. So that is the whole deal, man. [laugh]  
  
Q: That moment matters. Right there. You weren’t chasing a title, you were chasing an understanding. That “wait, how does this actually work?” instinct, that’s a capability. That’s curiosity, systems thinking, translation between worlds. Just to pin this down, When you were in that early electrical and computer engineering phase, what’s one concrete thing you built or figured out, even if it was small?  
  
A: Oh my God. Oh my God. Okay. So, Vividly, man. So we had we had this class. Introduction to Programming using C Plus. God damn. It might as well been freaking Arabic taught to a God damn, I don't know. Somebody who just- just speaks opposite of Arabic or something. So- so basically, hey, I did not understand the whole concept of programming or even just repeatedly doing something or tel- like- the concept You know, the language, the word itself was not in my brain So, When you're telling introduction to Programming, you might as well be talking about air, right? So I understand, okay, constants, you know, and then you know how- you know syntax and sure, and then they would talk about a class. I'm like, what the fuck? We're sitting on a class. So what do you mean we're creating a class Dude, Eh ma- and then we eventually created a library, right? Like, you know, I was basically like at the end of the class, you know, the teacher wanted us to create like template classes and create a library that you could check out books and whatnot, man, with C plus plus in a Terminal, I- I was, oh my God. Listen, I don't- like, I don't know how I got out of that, you know, you know, it was, you know, team projects and we had, you know, um other Rwandans that had scholarships ahead of us like, you know, people who had already passed through the first year that were, you know, sophomores who were freshmen. So they were, you know, they were helping us a lot. You know what I mean? But It did not make any sense. Now fast forward I am In uh I think it was sophomore year No- e- e- it was junior year and we had a project. We- we actually had- I think it was like a like a volunteering project where we basically we had to pick, you know- so- I think it was uh Shoot. Basically the Dean of Engineering taught a class to all the engineers where basically was a problem solving one on one type of class. It was called um, seminar or something where basically all the engineers, you know, mechanical, electrical, whoever, like we got together and, you know, hey, think about a problem Find a solution, man. What do you care about. So, you know, some people built like solar panels because again in Rwanda, and you know, we live at the equator, you know, thinking about how can we leverage solar panels and, you know, have people cook or whatever. That was one of the projects. Another one of the projects was one of- you know, one of my classmates, his name is Ryan- you know, was Ryan Is Ryan. And, you know, he was a bit more experienced and, you know, he's Christian You know, grew up in the church and he had I don't know, a pastor friend or whatever in San Diego That You know, basically there was a nonprofit that was international, that was all about evangelization, that were going around the world teaching the gospel, whatever and they just wanted the gospel translated and their stories translated. So they wanted an app, an iPhone app. an iOS app To basically translate the Bible and all the audios and stuff, basically to organize their content On- in an iPhone app So, you know, some people built like solar panels because again in Rwanda, and you know, we live at the equator, you know, thinking about how can we leverage solar panels and, you know, have people cook or whatever. That was one of the projects. Another one of the projects was one of- you know, one of my classmates, his name is Ryan- you know, was Ryan Is Ryan. And, you know, he was a bit more experienced and, you know, he's Christian You know, grew up in the church and he had I don't know, a pastor friend or whatever in San Diego That You know, basically there was a nonprofit that was international, that was all about evangelization, that were going around the world teaching the gospel, whatever and they just wanted the gospel translated and their stories translated. So they wanted an app, an iPhone app. an iOS app To basically translate the Bible and all the audios and stuff, basically to organize their content On- in an iPhone app Using Swift Oh my God. Ryan had done. iOS development? I ha- I did not know nothing about. Even like I didn't have a smartphone per se. Ryan was the one with a smartphone. And I remember being on that project And pretty much Ryan did just about everything. I- I probably added a button to the freaking thing and we- you know, we won you know, on a group project of 3 people. Somebody else wrote some presentation, but Ryan basically coded everything. But the thing that started making sense Was Basically seeing for the first timethe separation of Concerns of, okay, here's the UI, what the heck is the UI? It's the user interface Basically, This is the only thing that's engaging with the user, the user's gonna do- do something and then the UI given the encoding that's in the freaking little buttons and the quote un quote objects that that iOS gave us, this object has a class that's already built Now it's starting to make sense like a class is basically like has a bunch of doors and- and tweaks and whatever and you just touch it to do whatever you want iOS gave us a class that had all these properties that would literally translate the into things the code can And we can latch onto that Do something else To Basically connect what the Did And where the data was, or the content was, so that we could bring the data to the user given what they needed God damn So that's what programming isIt's Basically we're like freaking like I don't know, customer- Representatives, that just speak different languages and we have bosses that speak different languages and we have customers that speak different languages and we're in the middle So that's start to make sense to me.  
  
Q: That’s a powerful thread. Someone throws you a messy ask and you figure out the logic underneath. You translate between human need and technical structure, even if it starts out uncomfortable. So let me ask this, When you talk about that Gospel app project, What was your piece, even if it felt small, what did you personally get right?  
  
A: Mm-hmm Yes Dude So it was researching How, you know what, you know, basically like understanding what all the church had Understanding the users I- e...the Christians were Understanding the what do the pastor want the app to do Because it was totally different what the pastor wanted the app to do, what the Christians wanted the app to do was totally different And then also to understand well Just because the pastor wants something, does not mean that the technical team has all that information already structured the way the pastor wants it. Because the technical team does not even understand what the heck the pastor wants. Hence, the reason why this pastor is talking to some college kids to come and do something that his team is not doing You know what I mean So just be, it's almost like I started consulting at that age but I didn't realize what I was doing. Because, basically in this, you know, little, I don't know, like a month. No, it was a semester project. We had to you know, find time To talk. To these people Outside of school You know what I mean and come up with what what do we need to know. And by the way, I'm asking all this. without having any idea How it's actually gonna get built ?I'm just I'm like listen, man I'm worried about this little piece How are we going to build it? I don't know, but I know this is important because at least this is to me, what I would need to know If I was the app.  
  
Q: Exactly. Exactly. You’re thinking about the- exactly. So, yeah, you’re basically thinking about the whole system before you even knew systems thinking was a thing. So that ability to sit between people, yeah, and tech, and, sort of make the chaos make sense, that’s valuable. And you’ve been doing it since day one.   
  
A: I guess I never saw it like that.  
  
Q: Yeah, it all counts.  
  
A: Okay, so so that's, you know that's that's the school piece. But let's keep going man. Like that was That, you know, that was sophomore year of college, right? So let me kind of give you another piece that might be relevant to this.  
  
So, You got to understand, right? So at this point, I'm an international student Eh I'm in America on a scholarship, but again you know this is my first time in America and I'm doing what Americans do. You know, you're in going college campus, you got to work, man. You got to make some money, right. I have a girlfriend at this time and we got to go watch movies, you know what I'm saying. What - as an international student You you're not allowed to work outside of campus. So, you know, you figure out what is other international, you know, I'm not trying to invent the wheel. Like I have, you know, older sisters and brothers that are going to this school. I mean, not, you know, biologically, but I told you, right? So they've already kind of, you know, I don't know, just . Charted a path that I could step into And there are all these jobs, man, like cafeteria job, freaking, you know, uh, office of office of conferences and events driving golf carts, man, like I've never driven a car, now I'm driving a golf cart on this campus. I'm feeling like cool as hell, man. I'm making you know minimum wage $8 an hour But minimum wage $8 an hour man $8 you know, back in the time, you know, a dollar was 1000 Rwandan francs. I'm multiplying. I'm like yo, I'm rich, bitch. [laugh]  
  
You know, So anyway. So, so so then, you know that's that's what I'm spending my, you know, if I'm not in class Guess what I'm doing man, I'm making money, right So I'm washing dishes, you know, and and you know, I'm basically allowed to work 20 hours a week as an international student But I'm a full-time student, engineering student So if I really knew what the heck I was supposed to be doing I should have been keeping my ass studying Because I had a full ride scholarship I was getting a stipend I had tuition paid, books paid Everything paid, I didn't know freaking $8 an hour. But And I I was independent. I was living, I don't know, oceans away from my parents. Nobody was telling me what to do, man. I needed to go party. So you get you get the picture.  
  
So, I found myself doing basically, you know, I don't know, whatever you need to do to make a, you know, some some pocket money But Sophomore year hits and I then, you know, there's, you know, part of the scholarship was I've, you know, after two years in America, we had to go back in Rwanda for the summer to do a sophomore internship because part of the engineering program was halfway through You do a summer internship Which is going to help you in your application for work and, you know, yada, yada, yada, yada, right.  
  
So, you know, because we were presidential scholars, you know, on a Rwandan scholarship, you know, when other Americans were, you know, back, you know, home and looking for internship in America for us, we had to go back to Rwanda because, you know, we had to kind of like put our skills and knowledge back to usage to the people that were paying for us So Fly back to Rwanda it is, ticket paid, you know, so I'm feeling good You know, internship already arranged now, I am, you know again Arranged. I didn't choose. You know what I mean It was, you know, basically, hey, you're doing software. You got to go do a internship at the Kigali Institute of Science and Technology In the department of IT.  
  
So I just got to report, you know what I'm saying, like I land in Rwanda about a week after We show up to the, you know, to the office that was sponsoring us. They're like, welcome home. internship, you're, you know you're lined up to the, you know to the whatever a week before you've, you know, a week before you basically the, I mean after the internship ends, you're going to come back and you report, yada, yada, yada.  
  
So I go to this Kigali Institute of Science and Technology In the in the in the office of IT And obviously this is not, you know, it's not something that's very Plan organized Now they have, they, you know, they have a new pair of hands and I found out that they just you know, the guy who was there, he You know, the thing on his hand he had a uh- um- a Drupal site That he needed help with to kind of organize the school whatever And basically for a month, I mean I did I mean about two months really full-time but not yeah, yeah, about two months full-time, I just spent it learning about Drupal, learn about content management systems I mean, this is I never touched the website. I did not know what HTML was. I at this point I don't know jackman. I just I took two classes C++ you know, introduction and and C++ with like I don't I don't remember. It's like, you know, I I guess like It was advanced program with C++ where we're creating like STLs and stuff like that So, That's as far as programming as it goes everything else that I had done was like I don't know signals and systems You know, a class of you know, I don't know uh. Circ you know, electric circuits, you know, basically like binary, you know, logic and stuff like that And then I don't know like an AutoCAD class That's as much of an engineer as I was. You know, and and I had I had, you know, I had also, you know, took part of that, you know, project, you know, with Ryan where we were building this like I think it was called like I don't know , uh-f-f-fivefish for like the you know, the the gospel of five fishes or whatever. So, that's the extent of the software engineering that I had had So, In that internship what What I would say that happened to me was For the first time I realized that the word engineer or the word software means different things to different people. God, I was like, wait, wait, what do you but you know like yeah, he's like, yeah, you can figure this out. This is, you know, software, I'm like Not the kind that I've touched. You know what I mean But it was like oh, I'll show you. So he, you know, he basically showed, you know, started clicking buttons and showing me how the website works but then again From that, like, you know, I had, you know, I've used blackboard, I had to use a bunch of websites But I had never, I don't know why, don't ask me why But I had never became apparent to me that said website had to have somebody sit down and build it The way it works. [laugh You know like never, it never occurred to me, man, I don't know why Hey, you don't know what you don't know. You know what I'm saying So. I'm sitting there like It's so like I don't know. It sounds like rocket science to me at this point because I'm like, what am I supposed, like I don't I don't even quite understand what this internship is really about. I'm kind of like faking it until I make it. I'm like, wait, I'm supposed Like, I don't know why this person thinks I'm somehow going to be able Why is he speaking like I know what the fuck this means.  
  
You know what I mean Again, like as far as he's concerned, you know, he's been working, you know, he's he's an IT specialist, you know. You know, he was even Ethiopian. So imagine an Ethiopian living in Rwanda You know, he's, you know, he's he's on a work visa and you know, he's a network engineer And you know, he's supposed to maintain websites of the school, yadi, yadi, yada and here's a kid that just came from America. Software engineering got a docket, electrical computer engineering It's like, hey, make him, you know, make him do something in the tech man, in the in the in the software shit So yeah  
  
Like, you know, he's just, you know, giving me the lowdown and clicking buttons and showing me Drupal, you know what I mean, templates. In my head I'm like- god damn it It's back to square one you know  
  
And, but, you know, so another thing that that that's going to have to be interesting to you the whole time, these two years I'm in America, I'm going to freaking English dictionary Because at this point, I've no I don't really know English like that because I've realized that When people are talking about a class, they don't mean the class that I know, that I'm sitting in I'm starting to realize that and object I need to understand what the freak the word object means, man. Because what the fuck we're talking about object oriented programming and this thing is about to kill me. I'm getting zeros in Cs So what the freak is object? What is orientating? What is programming? And when you put them th-th-three together What the f-fuck does it mean, dude  
  
So because I'm realizing, dude like they're speaking English I know I took a TOEFL exam and I was one of I, I got top grades in my, you know, whatever, 200 and some people that I was So I knew my ears were calibrated to understand this language of freaking Brits, man  
  
No Like that are technical, that means something to a community of people that agreed on the terms I was like, fuck me. So then I realized that was so used to the World that he lived in and the lingo and the language that he used that he assumed that I knew Because I also showed up saying that I spoke the same language Just because I fucked around and said I did software.  
  
Q: Exactly. Exactly. It sounds like, it sounds like it seems like you’re you’re starting to realize that the skill wasn’t just coding. It was about translating between worlds, no?  
  
A: Yes, yes, yes. And and then I realized that I couldn't put words into, you know, I couldn't put them into words like that then But the only thing that I knew was like I need to figure out Is he still speaking Chinese, Spanish? Like I need to get a dictionary for that language. You know what I mean? Because I mean, I obviously, you know, we're speaking He is talking to me, I'm not sitting there- like I could reply to a word But the words that he's using man like I don't think we're we're we mean the same thing or I understand the same things So, Basically, I've had to figure out what the heck is Drupal What's a content management system What's a website What's a tab Because this is, you know, these talking about tab, tab, tab Bro, what the god damned What's a tab? But but in a way like I-also knew or I felt Like in those moments when, you know, he was demonstrating all this I don't know, it's just intuitively I knew that I couldn't ask him right there what's a tab for some reason I I I knew that that is something that I had to go. Do on my own. I don't know how And then so, you know and then I'm like, you know what? Give me some time. Let me, you know, after he explained everything and I was very overwhelmed but I kind of kept my cool. I'm like, hey, you know, it sounds like Basically there's information That the school has And we need to present it And make it so that when the students or the teachers want this information, they can find it when they want it or where they expect it. Is that correct? And he was like, yes! and you know, Drupal, I'm like, okay cool. just give me a day Uh-and I'll come back and see, you know, tell you what I think and what we could do whatever Now when it research the hell out of Drupal And I realized, oh my god it was servers, there was You know, there was um- I- and I found out about WordPress. Like what the freak, do I got to know about WordPress? And yo, so basically I spent a whole month just Trying to figure out what I did not know And you know again um Thanks thankfully this was not like You know, this was like a pilot almost of like okay, how are we going to utilize this international students But, you know, you got three months and not a whole lot of of this organized so it's not like You know, they expect you to deliver something. So it's kind of like, hey If if you're self-driven, if you could, you know, make this be useful, meaningful to you, go ahead But you can also come here and chill and not do nothing So and and, you know, this is two years after I was not living home, I had family, I had friends You know what I'm saying, like, you know, most of it is not really Like every single day you're not just, you know, sitting in the chair just like, you know, doing work, like you're also trying to be on vacation, you know so You know, long story short like I left there Not really having contributed anything to the website. Apart from like, you know, uh wr- a document that basically kind of like I don't know my dumped my understanding or lack thereof of what I understood the project to entail I just wanted to create like a freaking, I don't know, to be on the same page to where like, okay I want to make sure that what you're saying is what I'm understanding before I even think I could start doing anything Because if we're not even on the same page. It don't matter what I think I'm building if what I'm building is not what you want, you know what I mean? So to me I realized that's the first thing that I needed to do, but It took me damn near two months to get to that because You know, all all the things that I talked about So, two years after I had, you know, in- in my two months after I mean three months after I had to come back to America To finish school. So I'm a sophomore I just literally, I knew in my in the in the back of my head I just. Bullshitted this internship But you know, but it was a great summer, I had fun, whatever, I learned about what I did not know, I learned that Software is it's a very multi- meaningful word And it means a lot of things to different people and I realized I don't fully understand what the heck but now something Uh very very Very real started happening. So Now I'm a Junior Okay? I got one more year, I mean, you know, two- one more year but a lot of people count two, but I thought one more year and then I'm done What am I gonna do when I'm done Oh shit! Okay, I see a lot of people starting to, you know think about uh master's programs, PhD programs again. My whole life I've been used to studying and I'm used to people paying for my school But then Ryan Just finishes internship at freaking Yeah You understand what I'm saying. And And and he's my classmate, and he's telling me all the shits that he did And he was getting paid $13,000 for the freaking three months. I said get the fuck out of here bro He said, yeah man And he's my classmate And you know, he's smarter and you know, of course he started playing with computers ever since he was a kid and he's American. So he's, you know, he has an experience and context and culture that I don't have But I'm like the fact that I'm sitting in class and not know that that you know sometimes I explain some stuff in physics and math and some classes that he don't know I'm like, yo, if this homeboy could be making 13 grand. I want that I'm like, so Ryan, what are you going to do? It's I do, you know, broadband uh you know, they, you know, they also thinking about, you know, bringing me on after the, you know, after I finish I'm like, What do you mean? They are like, you know, they're going to hire me after- I'm like - They gonna- they even had him continue his internship through school I thought that was sick. Homeboy was coming to school while I was waking up going to the cafeteria Yo, he was basically, he he had to change his school schedule to accommodate his work where he was getting paid, dude. He bought a brand new god damn bike with his money. I say, yo, that software money? I want that software money. Fuck school. So, so then I was like, yo, so how much they going to pay? Yo, I started looking at how much software engineers made. I was like, what the fuck? A 23 years old, I can make $60,000 Multiply by a thousand in Rwandan francs, that's 60 MILLION RWANDAN WHAT THE FUCK I was like, yo, I want this So I'm like, how do I get a job How do- How do I get a job? I need to get employed, man. I'm- like that's the job that I want. I'm looking at it like With the eyes of all the money I never had. You know what I mean So. At that point though, I started looking at like Job You know, like job openings You know, like basically like, you know, where do I find jobs? And everyone was like, yo, you just got to find companies. So obviously I went to broadband because I knew somebody worked there. And I looked at their jobs. And I'm looking at Like, you know, Ryan is showing me like a like an entry level software engineer job And I'm looking at the description and the requirements and I'm like what the fuck. I don't think I understand what they're saying I'm realizing that I'm getting prepared Or I can become a software engineer after I graduate But I'm going to school supposedly supposed to be learning shit that's on this piece of paper That is telling me what the job wants And I'm realizing. I only know like, I don't know like 20% or like I can understand what they mean when they say object-oriented programming, I've seen those fucking words But you know they're saying that I'm supposed to be like you know doing object oriented programming And and high level languages and I could You know solve problems using class I'm like. I mean. I mean all those words I've heard But um, I can't do that- Where do you learn how to do that at? You know what I mean? And and I'll go rhythms. I never studied algorithms. I have study freaking you know, like data structures And I knew that There was another book, because we were in computer science program We were doing electrical computer engineering. So there was a whole lot that was not computer science which is data structures You know, and algorithm, which is, you know, got a little, you know I don't know, a little you know taste of like You know Oh, then, and you know what it means, and You know, search and binary But listen at the end of the freaking semester, nobody went in to know freaking, oh, you know this is how you do binary search, and this No, none of that And and I'm here looking at a freaking job description that's telling me that I'm supposed to be doing this shit I'm like, yo Who's gonna give me this And I'm realizing None of the classes that I got left is going to teach me any of this. How do I fucking be ? I'm like, Yo, so you mean to tell me- I've been here. At this school. And I was supposed to learn some stuff And nobody told me this. [laugh And the answer was Yeah I was like, you gots to be fucking kidding me So Ryan, how do you know this? So I started asking Ryan, like yo, how do- How did you get that job? Was it oh may- you know, about this job- you know, this book called Cracking the- you know- Coding interview ?  So I started learning that there are resources outside. You gotta know what you want and you gotta go find information, man. Just in school Isn't-is not in the business of getting you the job that you want It's you who's in the business of figuring out where you want to get What's necessary What can you use from the little bit shoelaces that you have to tie them bitches up and pull yourself up, man. What do you got you know And I'm like oh my god Okay, so then I was like okay shit Okay, I need to basically teach myse- Like I need to buy this coding- cracking the coding interview And then I started looking at the coding interviews in there And, dude, the questions that they're asking, I'm like How do you even begin to Oh God! So I spent the next two years trying to learn how to interview You know pro- you know just on the spot, you know, white board Because, you know This is problem solving where I'm basically given a freaking confusing ass problem And I'm- without it- like and I'm supposed to basically have questions to figure out what questions I need to ask.   
  
Q: Hmm. Exactly. Right. Exactly. you gotta reverse engineer the whole thing just by yourself like. Yeah, not easy.  
  
A: But you nobody told you  
  
Q: Mm-hmm. It’s just understood.  
  
A: Oh And and and so and then I'm like How am I supposed-  So basically I'm kinda like I'm you know- I'm living Matthew 7:7 man, knock, ask, freaking kick doors down until this shit opens. So I'm like, all right, bet. So- Ah- You know I'm asking Ryan. And and at this point, you know, I you get I'm going to a California Baptist University. You know, it's a Baptist you know college. I'm, you know I bought into the whole idea that, you know you got to go to church every Sunday, yada, yada, yada, fine I'm going to church. But, you know, thank- thankfully the pastor there- You know, I talk to him about me and like- You know, he's talking- so what are you gonna do after college? because he has kids that are also in college who are about the same age. You know, they're talking about the future And so what are you going to do? He has some interest in me. I'm like- Yo, I'm thinking about going and doing software engineering, but I don't know anybody who's a software engineer, so Do you know anybody who's a software engineer? Oh, you know what? There's actually a guy who's here in the congregation and Oh my god, I got connected to to a guy who works for a software company. I'm like, god damn, okay, good.  
  
So that's when I started also learning that networking is very like, that's when I understood what networking is. That's the word that I also had to learn So Then The guy who I got connected to, was not even a software engineer. He just worked at a software company. So he accepted to find me a software engineer and The friend that he found me was a- Ss- Like uh he was a web developer, At a company in LA called Rubicon. Like You know fast forward, I drive a Rubicon Jeep, but it has nothing to do with it, but The company name was Rubicon. It was basically like a like a marketing uh company that did some like, I don't know, like You know I guess like brand design for, you know, LA people. You know what I mean? LA businesses. So Then you know- I I got you know, I got I got an an a phone number And, you know, he said I could call him and ask him any question that I want if I'm thinking about- You know, if I want to ask somebody who's doing the thing that I want to do. I'm like, oh my God, that  
  
- Listen, thank you for being generous for your time. I make time to call them. And I asked him I'm like, dude, like, look, I'm- I just- I'm a I'm a junior right now Literally 2 years, clock is ticking Like, You know, I- I don't know what you did in college, but I can see that you're doing what I'm doing and I'm you know- he's been- he had been doing it for 5 years I'm like  
  
Listen like It- You know, I'm right now I'm um, I'm 22  
  
So If you were in my shoes, you're 22, you're a junior in college. And you know you wanna go do- you're doing right now But I you know- I told him about the gaps that I had. I told him like What do you do, man? Like how do you prepare? Like you know what I'm saying like Now that you know what you know, what would you go study? Like what would you spend time doing. Like when you're not in school Like when you're not in class, and when you're not doing the homework, and when you're not doing a lab that is school related What? Are you doing?  
  
I was like I work part-time job in a cafeteria, you know, a- drive golf carts. So like, you know what I'm saying like when you know- like- you know 10 hours washing dishes, 10 hours driving a golf cart And he said, how long you been doing that? I was like, oh, ever since you know, pretty much, you know- Second semester-freshman year I mean, hey, you know, I told- told him the same story I just gave you- you know, I needed money. I have a girlfriend, yada, yada, yada And I was like, look kid Like, can I be honest? He's like, yeah. He's like you said you wanna be a software engineer, but I think if you became honest with yourself, you'll realize that you want to be a professional dishwasher I say what the fuck?  
  
Q: Wow  
  
A: then I was like, what do you mean? He's like, kid, listen. You're going to- Yes, in two years, right? Yes I'm like, okay, how many people in your class? I told him. How many people you think are in America- l- Studying the same thing, using the same fucking book that you're using doing the same labs, man Like, so if they graduate and you come to my office with I don't know In your same class. Why the fuck would I give you the job ap- as opposed to Ryan Why would I give you that job? Like- what are you bringing to the table Because I don't know- by the way, like are you the A plus student across? Like, are you the smartest person? Like, and then also Like, what tells me that your lab was better than them? Am I gonna have to read all the fucking labs to understand what the fuck. Because I know you all did the same shit. So what sets you apart?  
  
And you know and and he was like, don't tell me all this, you know, I work hard and I'm very driven Because everybody gonna say that So what, sets you apart and how would I know?  
  
?  You know? And- And I was like, fuck He was like the- the way you answer that question Is what you do. With the time That you're not supposed to do anything with. He said that's when you show me what you're really passionate about. So. You don't know some stuff. Well, use the time- Have free on your hands and figure that shit out and if all you can tell me- Is that There were something that You study in class that didn't make sense and instead of going and washing dishes, you went to the library. Sat there for fucking three years And you figure that shit out That would impress me Better than somebody who went and checked the box and got an A He was like- That's what you're supposed to do- Went to school to study What the fuck- you getting paid To study. So what are you- what do you wanna, cookie? I'm like, fuck.  
  
I'm like, oh, okay, I get it. So I went and just quit my job, my dishwashing jobs, I quit 'em And then I'm like- He was like, yeah. So he was like, what like- Basically figure out how do you become a software engineer now. Not two years from now Start becoming a software engineer now Figure out what is software. What do software engineers do? What can I do with software now Figure out now. And then two years from now Whoever's talking to you Show them that you've been a little software engineer all these two years They just didn't know about you. And you're not asking for a job, you're just asking them to make you their teammate because- They want you, not the other way around. I was like, oh shit, okay, great. So I quit my dishwashing jobs And I went back to square zero. I'm like, okay, here we go. What the fuck is software again? [laugh].  
  
Q: Mm-hmm. Back to the beginning.  
  
A: Yes, and and then and then I was like, okay, but how do I become a software engineer? I'm not even allowed to work outside of campus. You know, victim mentality Like I could go do this, Broadcom. Because he's an American he's allowed to do an internship outside I'm in the confines of this little freaking college And I also found out that the college that I was going to was not even engineering accredited because the program had only been there for three years.  
  
Guess what? My college was not even on the list of where I went to college. I had to I had to choose other. I was like, fuck me, man. So I had- a mountain to climb, you know, so Then I was like, okay, fuck it And I knew that there was a library with computers. I'm like, okay, wherever there is a computer. I know now at least two years in, I know there's software somewhere if there's a computer. . So Maybe- Library. I've- you know I did some research, I looked at the library, I looked at the jobs. They you know, they had library jobs where you would literally just like a- Like an assistant librarian where you're standing there just checking people in and out. I'm like, nah, that's not what I wanna do. I'm like, I want to do software shit, like I'm done with this fucking, you know, pocket money shit I'm like Research a- I found out that there is There's There is a person in the library With a title- Digital Librarian I say , what I gotta talk to that person You know what I mean? Because digital now, I'm- you know, I know that I just did, you know, You know, a dit- like a- like a bit, I- I did analog circuitry and I understand what a digital ana- is I know that software is…  
  
Q: You were just talking about how you tracked down the digital librarian and realized that this person was sort of single-handedly keeping something running with the software. Go on.  
  
A: There you go so So so basically, his mandate was to restock The quote unquote digital library. So there was a physical library. But you know, when you know, students were doing research and You know all the I think like if you think about like the Ops- You know all the like the the digital Sources to pull from like when you're writing papers and stuff like that, you know what I'm sayin  
  
There's a network of libraries, a network of- You know- school's subscribed to so that their students With the EDU accounts could basically have access to these package of books, right So it's almost like Costco of digital books that are being rented or subscribed to by schools, right? Because I mean it sounds like a good business So, but you know, if you think about it you know, the you know, the school that I was going to is California Baptist University, if you look at the structure or the history of this university, basically started out as like a like a freaking Baptist seminary of some sort, you know Arts College. you know ev- you know, with a business in the needs and the, you know, Riverside growing and stuff like that. California, Silicon Valley, all that stuff. You know, the school kept evolving and as they evolve They're, you know, bring, you know. The- their student body is being diverse, they have different majors, they're adding different majors, and that they're adding different majors, they got to support them and as they need to support them, they need books, you know what I'm saying So every year, The digital librarian - Their job is to basically kind of do an audit of, you know not an audit, he basically you know he's his stakeholders are the deans uh the different schools. So if there's a new school, The dean has to know Hey, you know, these are the you know these are the the teachers and you know basically the professors and everybody will kind of, you know get together and and figure out what You know, material and books and and categories and whatever books that they needed. And then the digital librarian was to basically Do an inventory of like, okay, we already subscribed to, you know this subscription and this subscription, but this subscription is more arts and this subscription is more science, but we just onboarded a whole architecture freaking, you know, department. So we need to figure out what other subscription, a bundle, has architecture, you know, books. But, you know It's it's a mix, man. You don't just go and be like ,"hey, man, I just want you know. Only architecture ,you know, books", nah. You get a bundle that also has science, but You know these science books might have duplicates of what you have, so what has the good return on investment But these packages we're talking about, Man, we're talking about tens of thousands of bucks, some of them hundreds of thousands of bucks. [laugh ] You know what I mean? So my man's digital librarian guy He had a big old Excel spreadsheet Multiple fucking sheets. And you know he was running some macros and shit And I'm like, oh man, I'm like how do you like your job? Is that fucking hectic as part of my job ? I'm like Great Would you like I'm like, listen, I have nothing but time on my hands Literally, I just told him the story, "Like, look, I have literally 20 hours on my hands. Do you hate it enough that you would like, listen that you would just off it to somebody who somehow is excited about this problem? [laugh And he was like, "Wait, you serious? You want to Like, dude, this stuff sucks. I'm like, "I like stuff that sucks " You know what I mean? And I'm like, you know, because from what I understand, What you're doing What you want to do is just like You basically want A- A- A- Something that can do what you're doing but faster, right He's like, yeah, I don't want to be freaking clicking this. I'm like, yes, that's what a program is I understood that, you know what I mean I'm like, I think I could build you a program That can Um- You know, like I didn't even have automate. I don't I didn't have the, vocabulary But I was like, I have- I have a, like I- I think I can write you a program that can Basically like, once I understand where you're getting information and you know where all these Information is Like all you'd need to do is just like - You're basically checking to see, hey, do I have this book? Is this book there? And then you just want to count like, you know this- You basically want to know which package is More relevant Given the need you have a need, you- you know, you know you need architecture books, but if- if this package has 70 percent architecture book. That other one has 80 percent architecture book 80 percent architecture book is good. But if you don't want duplicates This one Has 20 duplicates That one has 30, but it has 80 with 30 duplicates. So do duplicates matter more than the architecture book? What do you want? But I can show you all this information and you can If you're not the one to make the decision, you can send it back to the deans. And they can tell you what to buy. You just click buy He's like, really? I'm like, I think so. I mean, obviously, I'll smoke, I'll s- Just blowing smoke. Like-like, theoretically, I knew it was possible And I knew what software was. And I knew if you you know if you leave me in a room, I will figure it out because I just spent three, you know, three months basically figuring shit out But Again, like, I'm, I'm seeing as far as my nose at this point, but I'm just describing this nose as is the Eiffel Tower right now So. Then he's like You know what That's like, I would love for you to come. You know, it was like You know um Like, basically he just, you know, he just gave me more information. He was like, you know, at the library, you know, all the departments, they get to have uh student workers Throughout the school year. But I- I- I didn't- I could not figure out what to even get a student to come do here, but you just gave me an idea. Would you like a job I was gonna do this shit for free You know what I mean? I thought I couldn't do software outside of school And here was About to get paid again For 20 hours of fucking week As a little software engineer And I figured out yo- I- I learned- listen. I went and figure out Perl I did not know about no Python. I just looked up, like, scripting And I basically wrote a goddamn Perl script. I taught myself Perl because I, you know, I- I was doing C plus-plus. I could figure out what the fuck these constructs are Figure out what Perl was And I built 'em A literal Auto-, like, automated script That will go and read, basically, he had all these uh, you know, the books that he had, we already had in the library that were already in the Excel spreadsheets. You know, some of them had ISBNs, some of them didn't. Some of them had titles, some of them didn't. It was you know, basically, it's like just imagine just like  
  
I don't know, man, normalizing a freaking Shit show. You know what I mean? But then after you normalize it  
  
Basically imagine a- a script that basically, you know, goes- through and only just keeps You know, just cuts out- all the books that don't have ISBNs or don't have titles because it's a waste of time. We're gonna worry about you know, filling in But let's just work with the data that's actually complete So that we can see if the system works So I built on basically like, you know, I kind of pretty much triaged his freaking data To like, hey, this shit. We need to either, you know, you know, basically like account for my time where I'm going in and actually filling in these books, you know, looking online, figuring out okay, what's the ISBN for this book and filling them in Or We just work with what we have and then we'll, you know, worry about what's not complete later And basically I convinced the man like I started giving him ideas of things he never thought about but long story short By the time I was done, I-I worked on this project literally all two years Getting paid Where I built him A system that will literally do what he was doing You know Using Perl  
  
And you know basically I had to triage, you know, spreadsheet Pretty much search you know and- and- and filtering  
  
Q: That’s pretty phenomenal. So what did that experience give you heading towards graduation?  
  
A: Oh, I'm I'm about to tell you. At first. It just showed me how to solve a software problem Basically, I understood that a software problem You know, you know, from from the from the That Component of people that are gonna to be using this thing So I understood that part And I had to understand that we kind of got to organize you know, the- you know, we got to get on the same page. Everybody that- that- that has a stake in this thing needs to be on the same page and they need to Agree To how You know, library thing, I put all those two-two together, but also learned that IThe person that's closer to code knows the code best. So I can actually propose things. That I Could actually You know, I mean like, you know, like I started learning about, you know, like almost like a stand up process because, you know, I was literally I had a- I had a chair in the digital librarian's office. So every day I would give him a status update, you know what I'm saying? And I would tell him what I needed to do that day So I learned how to communicate progress And then another thing that I learned was Literally- like- it's almost like I found my own problem I- basically I solve it the way I was thinking But also I was getting some, you know, some advice from him. I wasn't doing anything before I kind of tell him the plan that I had to ask him if there was anything that I was overlooking Again, I learned to to Almost like Work hand in hand with a client. So my consulting, I guess, got to another level And then the other piece too was, I learned how to You know, pretty much likehow to generalize my knowledge I went from C++ I taught myself Perl and applied Perl instead of C++ So the concept that I had learned in C++ transferred. So, you know, again, like now looking at it as a teacher Hey, man! I had learned how to learn You know what I mean And And and then from there too, Now Here's an experience That when I you know, when I was, you know, interviewing and stuff. Yeah, I was talking about building software. I had rather been doing building software. Yeah, sure. I did not know about All the ways that you can build like you know, all the gamut of anything because it didn't no make no sense. But I could tell you the problem that I ran into of trying to freaking Run a for loop For you know, on you know sheets of like 500,000 pages E- you know- rows each, and I could tell you how that shit was slow. You know, and I could tell you how when I cut that thing into like Pieces of things that didn't, like when I reduced that, I could tell you that I saw that thing go fast because I had the time. I didn't get How to optimize this because actually that was not a part of the priorities But I could tell you what I would think about doing if I had time Like I knew now how to, you know, I knew that It was basically Given this What would you do? And my next question like, okay, given this What do you want me to do And then if I understand what you want me to do, then I'll be like, oh  
  
! So you want me to do this given this Question, do I know this? What am I assumptions? You know what I mean? Like I started learning how to Think through a problem Walking through the problem understanding what I have understanding what's needed. Understanding the interfaces of Each little box. Understanding how each box can be talked to. How each box was built to be talked to. And I understood that I do not have to build everything like I understood that there were like libraries or some-some routines that other people built Are either built me a freaking box that I could just plug into a wall that's like You know, like 24 volts and boom, it works I'm like, oh shit So that's when I'm learning what as I'm doing this job So that's that's one experience that, you know- I'm gonna stop for a second and have you kind of recap, but I thought that that- that was gonna be relevant.   
  
Q: Right, right. Hmm. Wow. Yeah, what I’m hearing is that you’ve- I mean, that sounds like a transformative experience. Not only were you able to automate a a laborious process, but you learned how to learn, how to solve problems, how to work with a client, how to communicate progress. It sounds like a really valuable opportunity.  
  
A: Yes. And then so Another experience that shaped my career uh in college. So Jun- uh- about Yes, summer Yeah, summer of junior year Uh I'm taking a course I'm taking a differential uh differential equations course With a teacher, a professor who is at the point, he's a mechanical engineering professor in his class, it's cool it's, the youngest person on the faculty. And, I don't know, I feel- You know, close to him, you know, I've kind of, you know, Develop a rapport with him. And the class, literally, this is the last class And we're about to go in the summer And in the summer, international students are allowed to work forty forty hours. I know I got twenty hours that I'm working in the library But now I have twenty hours that I want to do more things that I know in a about a year from now is going to basically set me apart And, you know, I've- I've already learned to just you know I guess, network and and- and- and- I guess scratch interest from people. Just communicate, communicate my interest but also align myself with other people. You know, here I was And as the class ended, I- I just raised my you know basically his name was Dr. Ricard and I'm like, hey um Dr. Ricard said like any last questions? As we wrap up I raised my hand. He was like, "What's up, Nelie?" I said, Dr. Ricard Weird question, hey, you don't have to answer this What are you gonna to be doing this summer And, you know, he was like, "Oh man, dude, this summer, I you know, I'm gonna spend some time with family" You know, he start telling me how him and his wife and kid are gonna travel, yada yada yada  
  
And I'm like- Great, man, that sounds like a great summer. And I'm like but That is so weird. And- and I'm gonna tell you why You know, I thought That people with PhDs and, you know, doctor this and doctor that I thought y'all did research and whatnot, like Y'all don't do that  
  
He was like, man, listen. You know, yeah. I mean- I- I wish But, you know, realistically There's no funding  
  
And You know Like there are some stuff I wish I could do but I also got to spend time with family if I'm not spending time with my family by the but the end of the summer, y'all need me so my you know, like I wish, but the reality is reality I'm like, wow I'm like- So, wait You could do research if you could But you don't have the time If you had the time and you had the resources, what research would you do this summer  
  
He was like, oh, that's an interesting one, like, come to my office and let's give chat So, I go to his office  
  
And I'm like, look, man, I'm asking you this question because I got twenty hours on my hands. And you know, I could fuck it. I could put my head on something So Dude, what you can't do or what you don't have time to do If you think I'm even like, I don't know Smarter than a freaking, I don't know, five-year-old? What can you have me do? I could do some leg work for you. You don't got to pay me. Like, I don't need like, like I already- like I already have my stipend I just want It's- like I don't want to spend the summer sitting on my hands, man. And He was like, "Okay. I'll think about it." I left. And then guess what? Dr. Ricard came up with a research project for me  
  
Q: Wow  
  
A: And basically, so Dr. Ricard, before he came to CBU He worked for uh Alcon the you know the- the- the eye Contact people in Irvine. He was- You know, he- you know, he worked in their, you know, R&D department. Because, you know, he's mechanical engineer, fluid mechanics Eyes Surgery You know, he was helping them and he, you know, his PhD he Did a lot with glaucoma so he's interest was in glaucoma And he had a research project that he was thinking about, he basically was thinking about you know uh a- a- problem that to me didn't make no sense at the time, but Literally, you know, I just knew he was talking a whole lot about this thing called glaucoma. He was talking about this called Alcon and he was talking about this thing called valves. He was talking about this. And and I'm like Great Ugh- back to square negative five again.  You know, but I'm like, oh, but this is becoming, you know, like th- Is this what it is basically? Like You know Everybody that carries this freaking bubble thing around With space between their ears they- they have a box in there and whatever is in there I don't know what it is. But whenever they're open their mouths Yeah, it sounds like they're speaking English, but bro- like You got a freaking get some I don't know, some dictionary that's specific to their brain or something You know. And I'm like, okay, great. I'm like, Dr. Ricard, like You know, I know Like none of that makes any sense to me. You know I'm an electricalengineer. The stuff you're talking about makes no sense. So Do you have any freaking thing that I could read, man? Like Give me papers, give me something. Like, where do I start? Like, how do I get to the same page as you to where I could come and have an intelligent conversation with you using the same words? He's like, okay, say less. Man, this man, if I tell you he went and opened his goddamn cabinet, he brought a freaking mountain of Goddamn papers in- put in front of me Uh- he was like, "Alright, you know go- go read this and if you still you know like You know, let me know when- whenever- you feel like you have an idea, we will chat but listen, if you read this shit and it doesn't make sense and it- makes you just want to puke I would understand because There's a reason why I keep this shit hidden away.  
  
I'm like- I'm like, you know what? Roger that. Pick that freaking stuff up. went to the dorm and I went back at it I just read And, you know, had a dictionary I had a dictionary right next to me I had a dictionary right next to me And, you know, I just kept- reading, man, kept reading And then I started little by little, you know kind of like understanding a little bit about what he was trying to do. So what he was trying to do is The problem is this. When people have glaucoma Most of them. If they're lucky If they want to Uh, guess like. relieve themselves they go through surgery  
  
And when they go through surgery They're basically, you know, trying to, I guess, you know, remove whatever is blocking whatever caused them glaucoma And- You know This is- I learned that this is pre-operation before they go into surgery and post operation is after they come after- out of surgery. And Dr. Ricard from his expertise or whatever, he knew that there was a problem with What was happening post op  
  
Because The thing that apparently Was one of the reasons- Or one of the symptoms or correlates or causes whatever of glaucoma was some pressure in the eye. Again, at this point, I don't know jack shit about what he's talking about, but this is making sense  
  
So I'm- I'm kind of like Unveiling what I learned as I learned it, so you kind of have an idea of how my learning progressed. So So, basically, there's pressure in the eye When people go into surgery so that they can reduce this pressure that's behind the eye that's- that's pinching the nerve. So, you go into surgery and they do whatever they do in surgery to reduce the pressure, so when you come out of surgery, your pressure should be lower than it was when you went to surgery, you know . But- Given the- records that people had the post op Reduction was not significant enough And people were getting, I guess, you know, glaucoma again even after like, I don't know, six months, eight months of surgery So this pressure was picking back up. So what the fuck? We need to understand that And he basically said And- and this is pressure in the eye. I'm like, oh, what the fuck? How are we gonna measure pressure in the eye And you know, I'm- I'm now reading papers that are talking about micro-freaking Milliliters and it's like and we're talking about liters and How the fuck is a liter and pressure? What the fuck But then I'm realizing, hey motherfucker, okay, did you study physics, dude? Did you remember your fluid dynamics?  
  
And then So, you know, little by little, I'm starting to kind of put this together. But somehow Dr. Ricard thinks that You know, he's talking, you know, very excited. He's like, dude, like, you know, we can model this you know This is the first time I'm hearing the word model. I mean, you know, I knew modeling careers. I- you know, I was going to school in California, so I know about modeling a little bit. But- You know, not the kind he was talking about, you know. It's like, we can model this You know, using like You know, fluid dynamics and I'm like- The fuck man, what does that even mean? And then, you know, but you know, I keep reading, I keep reading. And then eventually I- you know, I even like get more understanding. So I'm- I'm like, okay, so when people go into surgery, What they- What they put in their eye is a shunt Is a valve.   
  
Because basically You know, the pressure that's behind the eye, how the fuck does that build up It builds up because the eye natural process of Basically fluid Flow management And there's this thing called the Aqueous humor Like, okay That's an interesting sense of humor.  You know, this- this aqueous humor that is not tears, that is apparently fluid that the eye bathes in, is continuously being recycled in front and behind the eye all around the freaking eyes taking a shower 24/7. I'm like  
  
? And- Apparently some of that process gets all mumbo-jumbled to- to where basically You know, I don't know for- I don't know- actual God or whatever the case may be, genetics but somehow, you know, the water or the- the aqueous humor. Behind the eye, The, you know, the drainage system- I guess clogs up And then as it clogs up, The aqueous humor gets trapped in this trabecular, you know , meshwork. And That You know- clogged aqueous humor in this mesh. which is all around the- the- the- the- the optical nerve starts pinching on the thing  
  
and as it's pinching on the thing, well, guess what? The signal that is coming from the outside world going to the freaking- I don't know- the CPU that is supposed to tell you what the fuck Well, it's not going through, man. You know what I mean? I- this is not The whole bandwidth is not going through. So you're losing some signal, so obviously, yeah, you're going to be as blind as a bat. Or you're not gonna see some shit  
  
So, I was like, "Oh shit!" So, The-the- the solution that- People are doing- and the sur- surgical situation is to shunt. this trabecular mesh work so that, you know- this you know- this trajectory of fluid that was clogged, they could give it an alternative path  
  
Q: Mm. And that’s where the valve comes in. Right?  
  
A: which Come on now, the valve is a goddamn parallel circuitry. I say Huuuh! Electricity! Resistance in parallel I was like, Oh shit, that's my circuitry class. I understand modeling now because basically If- Basically modeling is Okay, I understand this thing, but I have another different language that is actually more formal that can help me- basically Derive. Some features of this shit that I don't understand. From this shit that I understand that sounds better in my head. I was like, I-I can model!  
  
Q: That’s such a Oh, sorry. Uh that’s just a super cool connection that you made there between all those different concepts. But like, stepping back, how did that at that time, how did that experience shape your trajectory?  
  
A: I mean, you know, of course. it-it-it only makes sense looking back. But That's all I do as a software engineer I'm modeling all the time It's basically- I- I have all these quote- unquote models and what's a model it's just a generalized thing that I've worked on before that I now know Hey given these parameters Here's something I can spin up you know, give a take that Kind of like I don't know, describes the problem faithfully 80% And if I find any other problem, it's just, you know, it's a pattern that I've developed So I've modeled, like I can model or I could, you know, let's say, you know, let's say for instance, like, you know, when I'm thinking about I don't know- APIs It's just It's just a handshake model to me. . You know what I mean? It's like Somebody has information, the other person needs information that we need to agree on how we're going to be exchanging this handshake. You know what I mean And-and so to me- Like little did I know then But it's shaped How I think about it. I'm seeing a tree. I can understand a tree if I've seen maybe a car that looks like a tree You know what I'm saying? Like- Like-like it's almost like I'm- It's- it's transference I'm transferring some- some things that I've learned from one domain to another one And- It's- it could all still work because There's almost like a commonality of features or commonality of- of- of I don't know if similarities or some shit There is some similar stuff that I started noticing and and even though it was You know, gibber ish words or language, I started realizing more and more I'm not deaf. Like I can hear things And when I hear things They knock, you know, when they knock on some almost like If-if they knock on some Some concepts in my head already That means I already probably have a model that is connected to what I'm hearing If It's not connected to anything, that means Maybe I just don't have a bridge To my models And that’s what I need to build. So. the bridge is built by literally questioning what the fuck I don't understand Because By questioning, I'm basically bringing my current models. Bear on the current- problem at hand And asking, hey, is-is like- I'm basically it's like it's like, you know, I'm a freaking I don't know, carpenter or like construction whatever- crew And I'm going around the house knocking on the wall trying to figure out where the freaking, you know, where the beam is. [laugh] Because I know there's gonna be a beam behind a freaking house. I don't see the beam with my eyes, but the model on my freaking knuckles know that when I hear the beam, I will know You know So that's when I started realizing like- that's, to me at least that's how I started building my problem solving toolkit in a way So anyway- so I basically deciphered this whole glaucoma thing, I figure out how I was going to use- ele- electrical circuit modeling to model this you know, quote unquote fluid dynamic in the eye and then okay, well, you know, you- you know, can I model the trabecular mesh work as as a fixed resistance is this a variable resistance? Okay, you know how do I now You know how do I, you know how do I model Pressure. Well, that's voltage across a freaking resistance. You know what I mean? And then And then, okay, so how are those related and and how's that related to- to- to current because current is literally the flow of my freaking aqueous humor And how does that affect the pressure that the optical nerve is feeling So once I have- you know, these resistances and the voltages and the I's and I1 and I 2 and- uh whatever I'm- oh shit I have circuitry formulas almost like algebraic formulas and electricity that I can use and plug in the numbers for the pressure that I'm also modeling using a goddamn syringe of water that I'm pumping down a goddamn- you know- like- a convalve that's sitting in a bath of water that's supposed to model the freaking aqueous humor in the eye And I'm checking the difference of the freaking drop in the height of-of-of the water to measure the pressure And you know- the-the-the you know like the whole thing about physics and potential that is given by the difference of the water drop, and how that is being measuring the freaking pressure at the edge of the the valve and the optical nerve and and how my little programs because I had to build a little C-plus- program to solve this basically circuitry and then see if that mapped to the, you know, to- to- to the water syringe because I was also, you know, capturing voltage using this- po- this water pump that is attached to a freaking uh- like- you know- an- an electricity lab, it was attached to a oscilloscope that was showing me my, you know, my waves of how my- my water is dropping And I was able to map all these and actually come up with a picture That showed That if I can vary The resistance of the valve I can literally control The Efficiency of the post operational pressure I was able to understand that the valve was nothing other than A variable Resistance. [chuckle]. Fast forward We write a paper. I get invited. To go to Seattle at the Arvo conference. American Like- Like research vision ophthalmology. Plane ticket paid for. Hotel paid for Me and Dr. Ricard represent Cal Baptist for the first time EverTo go present a paper that I- I'm the literal main author on. Dr. Ricard put himself as a secondary author on I'm presenting this to surgeons, eye surgeons And explaining to them How they can better help their patients Using My fucking makeshift circuitry. And I'm like, this is some bonkers, man I'm a kid and I've not scripted this.  
  
And that conference, I of course started kind of like apply, you know, before that I had, you know, in pair I was applying to jobs and stuff like that. I had applied to jobs on Twitter Like I'll go to Twitter search entry level software engineering jobs and I just put resumes. and it was a company that had reached out. It was in somewhere in- nat- you know not- New Hampshire I was in California. I just knew New Hampshire as the 13th colony of the United States, nothing else. I lived in California my whole entire life as far as I was concerned, all those four years. And I did some interview and while I was in Seattle.  
  
That's when I got the offer to come to New Hampshire to work for Aspen Technology.  
  
Q: Mm. That must have been an incredible feeling.  
  
A: Oh man, you can't, I- like- I- I don't even know how to put it but- you know, this was after I graduated. I'm an international student Everybody that was my friend got scholarships, masters program PhD programs. I've basically burned all my bridges I'm going software engineer I've put all my eggs in one basket No offers I'm talking about this call I did not even negotiate I did not even know you can negotiate salaries They say 60 I say that's my dream money, man Yes, what do- when do you want me to start ? Like like, dude I have All that I've ever dreamed for Like all these negotiate- There's some things I don't know I'll figure out but- I'm an engineer that's about to make this much Yes Ship me out yesterday. I want to work yesterday. You know. So that's that- that's how I landed my first job out of college  
  
Q: Wow. That’s incredible. You bet on yourself and it worked.  
  
A: And- And all those experiences, I'm telling you- That Basically is what set me apart so that confidence that I had that helped me get out of this dishwashing professionalism thing is- what paved the way of A- First, you know, basically realizing, okay, I got to- I got to build this air into gold Where's gold in this air Like, you know, on-on campus I'm not allowed to work anywhere like, okay, I got to figure out- I got to hustle Like I know what I have I got to beat this rock until I see water out of it You know what I mean? So I learned that persistence I learned that You know, basically knocking, I learned that communication but also learned how to sell myself in a way because I learned how to you know communicate what I knew, I learned how to, you know, ask questions I learned how to translate what I knew because I also learned that, the people that needed things fixed or worked on weren't the most technical people They just knew more about their problem and they knew more about what they wanted but they didn't really care so much about how It worked That's that- that was what they wanted me to figure out because somehow they trusted or thought or they thought I knew.  
  
Q: Right. Mm-hmm. Uh that’s that’s amazing. Um Do you ever think back to that dishwasher version of yourself?  
  
A: No, I don't- you know- I do- of course I mean- of- you know, it's like it's kind of like I just- I didn't know what I didn't know but in a way, um It's one of those things like I- I yeah, that dishwasher part of myself man He's probably the one that learned how to hustle And He's- you know he was probably the foundation of which all this stuff stood on  
  
  
  
